---
layout: post
title: Numerical Methods for Density Functional Theory
date: 2023-05-06 08:00:00-0000
description: A Primer on Electronic Structure Calculations.
tags: DFT
categories: review
related_posts: false
bibliography: 
urlcolor: "blue"
---

## Introduction

It has been known for years that the physical laws underlying any arbitrary physical systems can be accurately described using quantum mechanics.
While this viewpoint is philosophically elegant, it is not really useful as quantum mechanical descriptions of many-particle interactions, is formulated in a Hilbert's space which scales exponentially with the number of particles, posing a computational bottleneck, which Bellman called the **Curse of Dimensionality**.

One can often get away with this, by modelling systems with mean field, classical particle based and even continuum based approximations as one often does in quantum field theory, kinetic theory of fluids and fluid mechanics respectively. [Molecular Spectroscopy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spectroscopy) is one discipline where errors induced by such approximations is often dire, requiring explicit quantum mechanical descriptions despite the aforementioned bottleneck due to Bellman.

Luckily there are several approximations that have been proposed that aim at circumventing this problem. One such method is Density Functional Theory. In what follows, I present a self-consistent introduction to Density Functional Theory (DFT) from the perspective of numerical analysis and an efficient algorithmic implementation.

## A Many Body Problem

To start with, I setup a generic manybody problem whose formulation depends on the following two postulates.

> **_First Postulate of QM_** : All the properties of a system $$\mathcal{S}$$, are sufficiently described by a complex valued wavefunction $$\Psi$$. 

> **_Born Oppenheimer Approximation_** : Due to the massive nature of nuclei with respect to electrons, their movement can be described classicaly with quantum mechanically evaluated electronic forces influencing their motion.

Consider a system $$\mathcal{S}$$ with $$N$$ nuclear centers and $$N_e$$ electrons. If $$x_i \in \mathbb{R}^3$$ denotes the position of an electron, then $$\Psi:\mathbb{R}^{3N_e} \mapsto \mathbb{C}$$.
 

Due to the BO approximation, one is not interested in calculating the time evolution of $$\Psi$$, rather given an electronic configuration, $$r$$, we are interested in evaluating the **ground state energy function** parameterized by the nuclear positions $$R$$. This is done so by solving the stationary Schrodinger's equation.

$$
\begin{equation}
    \label{eq:SSE}
    H\:\Psi(r,R) = E(R)\:\Psi(r,R)
\end{equation}
$$

$$
\begin{equation}
    \label{eq:SO}
    H = -\frac{1}{2}\sum_{i=1}^{N_e} \nabla_{r_i}^2 + \sum_{j>i}^{N_e} \frac{1}{\|r_i - r_j\|} + \sum_{i,j=1}^{N,N_e} \frac{1}{\|R_i - r_j\|} + V_{ext}(r,R,\omega)
\end{equation}
$$

Subsequently, the nuclear centers can be updated using Newton's laws.
$$
\begin{align}
    \label{eq:Newton}
    \frac{d^2}{dt^2} R(t) = -\nabla_{R} E(R) \\ 
    R(0) = R_0 \\ 
    \frac{d}{dt}R(0) \sim \mathcal{M}(T)
\end{align}
$$

where $$\mathcal{M}$$ is Maxwellian distribution depending on temperature $$T$$.

The eigenproblem in (\ref{eq:SSE})-(\ref{eq:SO}) suffers from the said curse of dimensionality for larger systems, ruling out the use of exact-diagonalization algorithms.

## Density Functional Theory

Alternatively, one can consider the variational formulation of (\ref{eq:SSE}) due to Fischer-Courant.

$$
\begin{equation}
    \label{eq:variantional}
    E_{min} = \arg \min_{\Psi \in \mathcal{A}_N, \langle\Psi|\Psi \rangle=1} \langle \Psi |H|\Psi \rangle
\end{equation}
$$

where $$\mathcal{A}_N$$ is the hypothesis space of [anti-symmetric](http://psi.phys.wits.ac.za/teaching/Connell/phys284/2005/lecture-03/lecture_03/node16.html) functions.