---
layout: post
title: Trajectory Based Machine Learning Potentials.
date: 2023-04-24 11:12:00-0400
description: Explainable force models in Computational Chemistry.
tags: QChem
categories: research
related_posts: false
bibliography: "mlp_literature.bib"
urlcolor: "blue"
---

## Introduction
Any physical system is characterized by a certain set of properties. It is these properties that define what that physical object is. Metals, for instance, are electrically and thermally conductive. Ceramics have extreme resitance to abrasion, electrical and thermal stresses. Biological tissues exhibit among other things properties such as regeneration. There are seemingly endless objects and endless properties that they posses.

It is all the more impressive that a finite set of elements and compositions thereof, constitue this rich tapestry of physical systems. Naturally, this question intrigued the ancients and continues to intrigue the modern day researcher. What we do know is, interactions among these fundamental building blocks are crucial to explaining these emergent phenomena. 

In that pursuit there is a whole branch of mathematics -- potential theory, devoted to finding a unifying framework for analyzing these potentials. There are countless physicists (theoretical and experimental), finding the **"right interaction potential"** for a specific system. And finally, there are computational scientists working towards effective computational procedures for calculating these potentials.

Until recently, a typical workflow for estimating the interaction potential for a system $$\mathcal{S}$$ would look like :
1. Experimental data acquisition and validation by an experimentalist.
2. Data analysis and theorization by physicists.
3. In-silico validation of the theory by a computational scientist.

In the age of machine learning, steps 2,3 are aggregated and serves as an **"automation"** of scientific discovery. While the results from ML-Potentials are certainly impressive, there are also unexplainable. "Unexaplainability" of machine learning models often has a negative connotation, and in some sense it is justified. But it also indicates that there are more accurate models that one can write down with our current mathematical framework. This work is a step in that direction while leveraging classical statistical models.

## Problem setup
