---
layout: post
title: Full waveform inversion with Neural Operators.
date: 2023-04-24 11:12:00-0400
description: A novel approach to an old problem.
tags: FWI
categories: research
related_posts: false
---

## Introduction

Full waveform inversion (FWI) is an effective technique to determine the subsurface mechanical properties of geological masses and engineering structures. It differs from other tomographic techniques in making use of the entire wavefield -- the amplitude, phase and frequency, to estimate features with high resolution. It consists of minimizing the distance between a measured signal and an artifically simulated one. 

Formally, let $$x \in \Omega$$ be the domain of interest and let $$m_{o}(x)$$ be an observable defined over $$\Omega$$. Let $$A : m(x) \times x \mapsto u(x)$$ be an operator, mapping the observable and the domain to the wavefield $$u$$. ($$A$$ is also known as the forward map.) If $$u_{o}(x)$$ is the wavefield corresponding to $$m_{o}(x)$$, then FWI is principally a minimization problem defined as:

$$
\begin{equation}
    \arg \min_{m \in \mathcal{M}} ||u_{o}(x) - A(m(x),x)||_p
\end{equation}
$$
where $$\mathcal{M}$$ is the hypothesis space of candidate observables explored with respect to a suitable $$p$$ norm.


Since its first formulation in 1977, much has been discovered about FWI with respect to the efficacy of optimizers (SGD vs quasi-Newton vs Newton vs Truncated Newton) and the choice of measures ($$L_p$$ norm vs Wasserstein measure). Furthermore, advances in computing has also benefitted this discipline; with highly parallel solvers that operate on very large time and length scales. 

Recently, machine learning based surrogates for forward maps are gaining traction due to their computational efficacy. Surrogates based on Neural Operators in particular have recently shown much promise for several applications in literature. In this work, we demostrate waveform inversion with such surrogates and outline their applicability for highly expensive optimization frameworks based on Bayesian inversion or optimal control. 

## Problem Setup