---
layout: post
title: (WIP) MolNets
date: 2023-06-15 08:00:00-0000
description: Graph Neural Networks for electronic structure calculations.
tags: DifferentialEquations
categories: review
related_posts: false
bibliography: 
urlcolor: "blue"
---

Using neural networks as predictive models for electronic structure energy and force calculations is a fairly mature field at this point. With the surgence of incorporating inductive bias into neural networks using the structure of underlying data, such as with graphs, has led to new architectures such as the SchNet, GemNet, EwaldNet and the like. Here we take a look at the workings of some of these network architectures with the goal of understanding open questions and alternative avenues for improving the existing methods.

### Problem setup

Let $$r \in \mathbb{R}^{3}$$ be the position and $$y$$ be the atomic signature of an atom. Given $$(r_i,y_i)$$ for all atoms in a molecule, the goal of electronic structure calculations is to predict the lowest energy state of such a molecule, say $$E(r_1,r_2,...,r_i)$$. This energy is called the potential energy surface.

A fairly successful machine learnig model for such computations is the GemNet, which incidentally won the Open Catalyst competition at Neurips 2022. GemNet can be classified as a Graph Neural Network. Here we will quickly illustrate the fundamentals of such a network, with eventual discussions on EwaldNet, a respawned version of GemNet including long range interactions computed in the Fourier space.

### Graph Neural Networks
